The result of exercise three is a set of activations for each neuron and 100 samples from two categories
in exercise four.
You will now perform a statistical analysis on those activations to see whether we can find neurons
that are statistically significantly more active for nouns versus verbs.
So we can do a couple of statistical tests here.
The one that I will focus on here for simplicity is a paired samples t test, because we have individual
neurons that have measurements in two categories.
So if you've studied statistics before, then you will remember that a paired samples t test is the
same thing as a one sample t test on the difference values with a null hypothesis value of zero.
In other words, you can calculate the difference between the activations for the verbs and the nouns,
and then use the one sample t test function from the Scipy.stats library.
Now the outputs of this function are t values and p values.
And because we are comparing so many neurons, you can use a significance threshold of p equals 0.05
divided by the number of neurons.
This corresponds to a Bonferroni correction for multiple comparisons.
When you finish this test, you can visualize all of the t values in a scatter plot like this, where
we see the MLP neurons on the x axis and the t value on the y axis.
Now, I have colored all of these significant results as blue circles and the non-significant t tests
using smaller red squares.
Now, because these are difference scores.
The positive T values correspond to neurons that have significantly stronger activations for nouns compared
to verbs, and the negative t values correspond to neurons that have stronger activations for verbs
compared to nouns.
So the final step in this exercise is to identify the two neurons that have the most extreme t values,
positive and negative.
All right.
So pause the video and good luck working through this one.
If you are not so comfortable with statistics and t tests, then feel free to check my code solution
and keep watching for my explanation when I switch to code.
Let me begin by reminding you of the shape of this all activations matrix.
So it's two by 100 by 3000, corresponding to two categories by 100 samples from each category and 3000
neurons.
So if we would calculate the difference using numpy dot diff.
Along axis zero, that is going to give us a matrix of one by 100 by 3000.
And this is one because yeah it's the difference between the two categories.
So then here we can implement the t test as a one sample t test.
If you are a statistics aficionado then you might think it's maybe a little bit questionable whether
we can really do a paired test, because the words across the two categories are not actually paired.
It is the same neurons, but the measurements for the two categories aren't paired.
However, the variances are the same and the sample sizes are the same.
So I think this is actually fine.
Okay, here I calculate the p value threshold.
That's what I called Greek letter alpha lowercase alpha in the slides.
So 0.05 corresponding to the standard statistical significance threshold divided by the Bonferroni correction
value or the number of tests we are performing, which is 3072.
Okay.
And then yeah.
So here I'm plotting the, uh, the t values by the p values and coloring them according to their significance
relative to this threshold that I have here.
And then here, I'm just finding the, uh, neuron associated with the largest t value and the smallest
t value.
And that happens to be these two indices here.
The final exercise is to test for generalizability.
So the idea is that we used all of these individual tokens to identify these neurons.
But it's possible that the results just reflect sampling variability and overfitting to the test the
train set.
So what we really want to do is test whether these neurons are also significantly differentiating nouns
from verbs in a completely new text that we did not use before.
In exercise four.
And that's what you are going to do here.
In this exercise, you can use really any text you want, but to reproduce my results, I recommend
copying the text from the randomness Wikipedia page that I have pasted into the solutions and helper
files.
So you should tokenize that text and push it through the model.
Get the activations from the two extreme neurons that you identified in the previous exercise, and
then create a heat map that will look something like this.
So this is the text from Wikipedia, and the color behind the text will correspond to the strength of
the activation of the largest t value neuron and the smallest t value, or the most negative t value
neuron.
And don't forget to min max normalize for the color scaling.
Now you can see that I have the text repeated here.
And that's because the upper text in red corresponds to the maximum t value neuron, which was the neuron
that most significantly differentiated nouns from verbs.
And the lower text here is the neuron that best differentiated verbs from nouns.
Now in this plot that you are looking at right now, these are not the real colors.
I set all of the color values to 0.1 just for this slide.
Of course, when you use the actual activation values, it will look different.
The text is the same of course, but the color will be different.
So then the question is whether the part of speech categorization that we identified in the previous
exercise generalizes to this new text.
In particular, you want to see if the bright red colours here correspond to nouns, and the dark blue
colours here correspond to verbs in this text.
Now you don't have to worry about doing any quantitative analyses.
This is purely qualitative here, just visual inspection.
Okay.
I hope you enjoy working through this exercise.
And I would also like you to think about what limitations or maybe problems or other issues with how
we set up this code challenge that you can think of and what you might do differently if you were to
do a follow up study.
I will discuss some of my ideas when I switch back to the slides after going through the code.
So here is the text.
The story behind this text is I wanted to just grab some text from a random Wikipedia page, and the
first thing that came to mind was look for the Wikipedia page on randomness instead of picking a randomly
selected Wikipedia page.
Anyway, Uh, yeah.
Here again, you can see I have no output from the model because I do not care about the final stage
of the model.
We just want the activations from these specific MLP neurons.
And that's what I do here.
So I grab the activations.
Uh, this corresponds to the batch dimension, all the tokens and the neuron index that had the largest
T value.
So that was one of these guys probably this one.
And then from the most extreme negative value probably corresponding to this one.
Yeah I guess that's that one there.
Okay.
And then here I, uh, modify those.
I transform those into, uh, min max scale so that they have the smallest activation value would be
zero, and the largest activation value would be one.
This is like boilerplate code which you've now seen before.
This just calculates the width of one particular letter using Monospace font.
And then here is where I have the code that runs through and actually generates that heat map.
So here I plot the text and then here is where I color it according to the activation of the max neuron
and the min neuron.
So all of this code you have seen several times earlier in this course, the only thing I really added
here for this exercise was a separate line, with some extra adjustments here, so that there are actually
two axes instead of just one axis in this figure.
Okay, so let's see what this looks like.
So what we are looking for here in the red text is that the nouns should have deeper red colors corresponding
to larger activations of this neuron, and the verbs should have more like faint colors closer to white.
So you know, we do see is that is a verb and it's colored very light.
Example.
That's a noun.
now outcomes.
That's a noun entropy uncertainty information.
Chance concepts applies as a verb.
Is is a verb.
Uh, yeah.
Let's see.
So it does seem like, you know, I'm not doing any quantification.
All I'm doing is some visual inspection of a little bit of text.
But these results visually do seem to be consistent with the statistical results, which is that this
neuron does seem to give stronger activation for nouns compared to verbs.
And now let's look over here.
So what we would really like to see here is basically the opposite that words like information theory,
uncertainty, probability, symbols, combination these should all have lighter colors and all of the
verbs like is applies, follow and so on that these are words that the verbs should have the deepest
blue colors indicating strongest activations.
So to some extent that does seem like it is the case.
However, it's certainly not the case that there's real selectivity.
For example, but is not a verb, neither is ha.
This is actually part of half hazard.
A semicolon is not a verb.
Actual apparent.
You know, a lot of these, uh, the comma and, uh, a lot of these words that are getting strong activations
from this neuron are not verbs.
So I think we can say that these results are somewhat qualitatively consistent with the identification
of the neurons in the previous exercise, but it's not really so compelling that we have identified
a noun neuron and a verb neuron.
Now, why might that be the case?
What are some things that you could think about to improve the quality of this experiment?
Uh, in a way that would make this analysis be more rigorous and more compelling.
So here are some limitations for this code challenge.
For one thing, we only looked at one transformer block, although there are 11 more that we could look
at.
And that's just in the small version of GPT two.
The larger models have even more neurons and even more transformer blocks.
Secondly, the sample size was also fairly small, so we just used 100 words per category.
That's a pretty small sample size considering the complexity of language.
So that means that the signal to noise ratio is likely to be fairly low.
So that's going to give us unreliable results.
And also Llms are really not designed to process individual tokens with no context.
In fact, you've already seen several times in this course that the first token in a sequence gives
kind of weird and sometimes extreme outlier activation values.
In fact, in several videos, I've even completely ignored or removed the activations from the first
token in the sequence, just because its values are so much different from the values of the other tokens.
Where the model can leverage some preceding context to process those words.
So that means that we might not really be doing a fair approach to identify actual category selectivity.
But on the other hand, having no context does mean that we get kind of like a pure processing without
any context modulations.
That is the theme of the next code challenge.
So we're going to get back to this discussion in the next video.
The generalization test was fairly, you know, qualitative and really just based on a tiny amount of
text.
So that's probably not really a fair judgment to say that the procedure did or didn't work.
Finally, we only tested for two parts of speech categories, which doesn't really provide much evidence
for selectivity.
If you really want to argue that a neuron is selective for a particular category, you would want to
identify neurons that have more activations for nouns compared to all the other parts of speech, including
verbs, but also adjectives, adverbs, punctuations, numbers, non-linguistic tokens like HTML tags
or Python code, and so on.
Nevertheless, my primary goal with this code challenge was to show you how to code for extracting activations
and setting up these kinds of analyses.
Doing this kind of research rigorously and carefully in practice is going to be like weeks or months
of full time work to make sure everything is really done correctly and rigorously.